Separating Data via Block Invalidation Time
Inference for Write Amplification Reduction in
Log-Structured Storage

Log-structured storage has been widely deployed in various
domains of storage systems, yet its garbage collection incurs
write amplification (WA) due to the rewrites of live data. We
show that there exists an optimal data placement scheme that
minimizes WA using the future knowledge of block invalidation time (BIT) of each written block, yet it is infeasible
to realize in practice. We propose a novel data placement
algorithm for reducing WA, SepBIT, that aims to infer the
BITs of written blocks from storage workloads and separately
place the blocks into groups with similar estimated BITs.
We show via both mathematical and production trace analyses that SepBIT effectively infers the BITs by leveraging
the write skewness property in practical storage workloads.
Trace analysis and prototype experiments show that SepBIT
reduces WA and improves I/O throughput, respectively, compared with state-of-the-art data placement schemes. SepBIT is
currently deployed to support the log-structured block storage
management at Alibaba Cloud.


 Introduction
Modern storage systems adopt the log-structured design [30]
for high performance. Examples include flash-based solidstate drives (SSDs) [5,10], file systems [15,21,27,30,32], keyvalue stores [25, 28], table stores [9], storage management [6],
in-memory storage [31], RAID arrays [18], and cloud block
services [40]. Log-structured storage transforms random write
requests into sequential disk writes in an append-only log,
so as to reduce disk seek overhead and improve write performance. It also brings various advantages in addition to
high write performance, such as improved flash endurance in
SSDs [21], unified abstraction for building distributed applications [6, 9], efficient memory management in in-memory
storage [31], and load balancing in cloud block storage [40].
Recent advances in zoned storage [4, 7] also advocate the
adoption of log-structured storage based on append-only interfaces for scalable performance.
The log-structured design writes live data blocks to the
append-only log without modifying existing data blocks inplace, so it regularly performs garbage collection (GC) to
reclaim the free space of stale blocks. GC works by reading
a segment of blocks, removing any stale blocks, and writing
back the remaining live blocks. The repeated writes of live
blocks lead to write amplification (WA). They not only incur
I/O interference to foreground workloads [18], but also lead to
reduced flash lifespans and unnecessary power consumption
in data centers.
Mitigating WA in log-structured storage has been a wellstudied topic in the literature (§5). In particular, a large body
of studies focuses on designing data placement strategies by
properly placing blocks in separate groups. He et al. [16]
point out that a data placement scheme should group blocks
by the block invalidation time (BIT) (i.e., the time when a
block is invalidated by a live block; a.k.a. the death time [16])
to achieve the minimum WA. However, without obtaining
the future knowledge of the BIT pattern, how to design an
optimal data placement scheme with the minimum WA remains an unexplored issue. Existing temperature-based data
placement schemes that group blocks by block temperatures
(e.g., write/update frequencies) [12, 20, 27, 33, 35, 42, 43] are
arguably inaccurate to capture the BIT pattern and fail to
effectively group the blocks with similar BITs [16].
We propose SepBIT, a novel data placement scheme that
aims for the minimum WA in log-structured storage. It infers the BITs of written blocks from the underlying storage
workloads and separately places the written blocks into different groups, each of which stores the blocks with similar
estimated BITs. Specifically, it builds on the skewed write
patterns observed in the real-world cloud block storage workloads (e.g., Alibaba Cloud [23] and Tencent Cloud [46]). It
separates the written blocks into user-written blocks and GCrewritten blocks (defined in §2.1). It further separates each set
of user-written blocks and GC-rewritten blocks by inferring
the BIT of each block, so as to perform fine-grained separation of blocks into groups with similar estimated BITs. We
summarize our contributions below:
• We first design an ideal data placement strategy that has
the minimum WA in log-structured storage, based on the
(impractical) assumption of having the future knowledge
of BITs of written blocks. Our analysis not only motivates
how to design a practical data placement scheme that aims
to group the written blocks with similar BITs, but also
provides an oracular baseline for our comparisons.
• We design SepBIT, which performs fine-grained separation
of written blocks by inferring their BITs from the underlying storage workloads. We show via both mathematical and
trace analyses that our BIT inference is effective in skewed
workloads. SepBIT also achieves low memory overhead in
its indexing structure for tracking block statistics.
